### Practical Considerations for Economic Goals

> The **Coastal Livelihoods and Economies** goal rewards productive coastal economies that avoid the loss of ocean-dependent livelihoods while maximizing livelihood quality. The **Tourism and Recreation** goal captures the value people have for experiencing and taking pleasure in coastal areas.

Several goals in your assessment will draw from economic data. Such goals that you can approach together may include **Livelihoods and Economies** and **Tourism and Recreation**. <!---Your **Natural Products** may also be related here, depending on the nature of the data.---> In any case, if you have separate sub-goals under **Livelihoods and Economies**, for instance, you will have to decide whether and how to weight them in the overall goal score.

**You will most likely simplifiy the given models** from the global approach because you will be looking at different economic scales. In most cases, you won't need to adjust for currency differences.

#### Livelihoods: *Ideal Approach*

> The **Livelihoods** sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality.

Ideally, this sub-goal would speak to the livelihood quality and quantity of marine jobs. It would capture all marine sectors that supply jobs and wages to coastal communities, incorporating information on the sustainability of different sectors and also working conditions and job satisfaction and identity. The jobs and revenue produced from marine-related industries directly benefit those who are employed, but also those that gain substantial indirect value from community identity, tax revenue, and other related economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy. You should capture the indirect as well as direct benefits from jobs, wages and revenue from coastal communities.

#### Ready to start on **Livelihoods and Economies?**

The first step of this goal is to **find the marine-related sectors in your area**. There are jobs that are directly connected to the marine environment, such as shipping, fishing, longshore workers, but also some that are connected indirectly, such as supplies and supporting industries.

> For example, the International Labour Organization provided wage data in the Global Assessment. There were data for around 150 occupations. They were categorized into 5 major occupations related to marine environments: Tourism, Commercial Fishing, Transportation & Fishing, Ports & Harbors
Ships & Boat Building.

After you have identified which jobs are in your area, you will want to find some measure of their **direct and indirect benefits**.There are two kinds of data you should be looking for. The first are jobs and wages data for the direct benefits of these jobs. The second are economic literature that show the indirect benefits of these jobs. The use of multipliers are an attempt to capture the indirect revenue generated by jobs more indirectly associated to marine sectors, and is encouraged in this approach. Where data do not exist, you should use multipliers derived from the literature that can be incorporated into jobs to attempt to capture this.

Then you must think about how to use the data to infer quality and quantity of jobs. Do you have the old format of data going back in time? If so can we check to see how wages per sector change over time? If they all change in the same way, for instance by following broader economic trends, then you could use those temporal relationships to project forward per sector per country.

> Remember: your OHI+ assessment would exclude the Purchasing Power Parity from the **Livelihoods** models because the economic data are just for your areas. This is a simplification of the default Global Model, and will lead to a simplification of the adjustment in the code.

****

#### **Economies**: *Ideal Approach*

> The **Economies** sub-goal captures the economic value associated with marine industries using revenue from marine sectors.

Ideally, economic data would be collected coastally, and traced from sectors both directly and indirectly related to marine industries. When these data are not available it is possible to use revenue data at a larger scale and adapt them to a coastal area based on population distribution. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving window temporal approach.

****

### Reference Points for the Economic Goals

The reference point in the **Livelihoods** sub-goal will likely be set as temporal approach comparing current to past conditions, or it will use a spatial comparison to compare against the highest-performing region.

> The **Livelihoods** sub-goal, jobs has a moving target temporal comparison in the Global Assessment, and wages had a spatial comparison. Comparing the number of jobs across different places would require at the very least adjusting values by the size of the workforce in each location. We highly recommend keeping the reference point for jobs as a temporal comparison, and only using a spatial comparison for wages (adjusted by purchasing power).

Another important choice is the reference year that is compared with the current status of **Livelihoods and Economies**. We chose a 5-year window because it is intended to capture short-term changes in trajectory, but, in regional assessments, there is the opportunity to study the behavior of the time-series with greater detail and, for example, establish a different time-period that reflects observed cycles, or even process the data to eliminate the “noise” from temporary fluctuations and capture more persistent trends.

In the **Economies** sub-goal, revenue had a moving target temporal comparison; we highly recommend that this remains a temporal comparison so that a specific place is compared to its performance in the past and not to anywhere else.

Because there are no set reference points for , you will have to make the reference points relative. One way to do that is to have a moving-window approach by comparing the value in the current year to the value in a previous years. How many years back do you wish to go? Would five or ten years represent current economic trends, or would there be the effects of an economic downtown?

> Five years were used in the Global Assessment because it represented a time long enough to account for an economic recession.

After that, would you want to give higher scores for increasing trends, or simply non-negative trends? Maintaining jobs was the Global approach, but in your regional assessment you may have a growth rate target for some sectors.

Lastly you will have to *combine the two components**. Keep in mind that within the **Livelihoods** sub-goal, there is also the possibility of weighting the two subcomponents unequally, for example if the number of jobs was considered more important than the wages rendered.

<!---Q: What are the sectors for marine jobs?
You could be employed in the TR sector
Direct and Indirect measures (economist multipliers). So we measure the direct jobs and multiply by multipliers (so that the fishermen include the bait guys, etc) where people come from doesn’t matter in the # of jobs but don’t increase the %employment. Nonnative workers: if they now live in the baltic, they should count. but migrant workers who work in the shipping industry maybe they shouldn’t count--->

****

#### Practical Considerations for **Tourism and Recreation**

#### *Ideal Approach*

Ideally, information would be available on how the ocean is used for enjoyment by both local residents and tourists, thereby capturing the full value of touristic and recreational activities. Models will vary greatly depending on data available: there are many ways to potentially measure the delivery of this goal. The type of reference point used will depend on the data available.

#### Ready to start on **Tourism and Recreation**?

> TIP: This goal demonstrates the flexibility of the OHI+ approach, and you are encouraged to engage creatively.

The **Tourism and Recreation** goal shows how flexible the OHI+ approach is to adapting models with improved data or approaches. Your approach will be different than the Global Assessments. It could be approached economically, and combined in the data searching for the **Livelihoods and Economies** goal, or done in another manner. You can get creative with your approach, and you are encouraged to read the previous OHI regional studies, such as the U.S. West Coast Assessment (2014) and Brazil Assessment (2014), since examples are best studied for guidance here.

There are potentially dozens of variables that affect the number of people that engage in tourism and recreation within a region and where they go, including local and global economies, infrastructure to support the activities, promotion of particular locations, safety and security, political stability, and so on. If you can't find information on visitors, can you find information on access as a proxy for visitors? Do people have access to boating areas, or to surfing spots?

> TIP: If you already have access information for **Artisanal Opportunities**, that would not be double-counting here.

Because we currently do not know which variables matter and to what degree, or have data for many of these variables, we instead assume that tourists distribute themselves within a region proportional to where local populations are, i.e. that populated areas get a greater proportion of the tourists.

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | Data on international arrivals were used as a proxy for the value of tourism and recreation in each region, as this was the most comprehensive data available on a global scale. Additionally, the length of each tourist’s stay in a region was incorporated: we used tourist-days as the measure for this goal because some locations, especially remote ones, may receive fewer arrivals but tourists may stay for longer periods of time. We therefore multiplied the number of arrivals by the average length of stay in order to incorporate this information. Sustainability was incorporated by using the tourism competitiveness index (TTCI) from the World Economic Forum to capture the sustainability of the tourism industry. To account for different surface areas and number of inhabitants across regions, the tourist-day values were adjusted by local population size. <br  /><br  />Global 2012 used a spatial comparison reference point that compares each region to the best performing regions. | It is very difficult to have a quantitative measure of whether people are fully taking advantage of recreation opportunities offered by marine and coastal environments. We assumed that the amount of international arrivals (although this ignores domestic travel and recreation), however, could be informative of the desirability of a coastal location and that this must have some relation with the health of the system. We use a spatial comparison reference point that compares each region to the best performing regions. In order to compare different regions, we standardize by dividing the arrivals by the region’s population. <br  /><br  />Few non-economic indicators of tourism and recreation exist at the global scale, and thus the original approach in Global 2012 approximated this goal measuring the number of international tourists arriving by airline to coastal regions, accounting for their average length of stay, and adjusting by the region’s population size. This approach was sub-optimal because it did not account for domestic tourism, which is a large part of tourism in many regions. Also, since we only had information about total arrivals, not just those of people who were intending to spend time on the coast, we standardized by dividing by the total population, not just the coastal inhabitants, which tended to penalize especially large regions with large stretches of inhabited inland areas such as Canada, Australia and the USA.<br  /><br  />We log-transformed the status scores because of an extremely exponential distribution of scores driven by a few regions with much higher tourism rates relative to population size. Even after this transformation the distribution of scores remained strongly exponential and so we rescaled scores to the value of the 90th percentile region, which was 25% of the maximum score. The 17 regions above this score were all given status scores = 1.0. | A score of 100 in US West Coast would indicate that tourism in a specific place has not declined compared to its value in the reference year. In other assessments this would indicate that a value was not lower than the region with the highest score.
**Global 2013** | We calculated the proportion of direct employment in the tourism industry relative to total labor force. As in Global 2012, we used the tourism competitiveness index (TTCI) from the World Economic Forum to capture the socio-economic sustainability of the tourism industry.<br  /><br  />To determine the reference point, we identified the best scoring region across all years and rescaled all other regions across all years to that score (Bonaire; 2011, which was the most recent year of data). The high-scoring regions were outliers in the distribution of scores (the second best performing region scored 40 and the third scored 28); we therefore rescaled all scores to the 90th percentile score. All regions above this score received a status score of 100. | We created a new model different from Global 2012 by using employment in the tourism sector as a reasonable proxy measure for the total number of people engaged in coastal tourism and recreation activities. Employment within this sector should respond dynamically to the number of people participating in tourist activities, based on the assumption that the number of hotel employees, travel agents and employees of other affiliated professions will increase or decrease with changing tourism demand within different regions.<br  /><br  />Ideally there would be data available specifically for employment in coastal tourism industries, however the best data available at a global scale report total number of jobs, not just coastal jobs, within the travel and tourism industries. These data include jobs that are directly connected to the tourism and travel industry (i.e. for both leisure and business), including accommodation services, food and beverage services, retail trade, transportation services, and cultural, sports and recreational services, but exclude investment industries and suppliers. Unfortunately it was not possible to determine the proportion of jobs affiliated with strictly leisure travel. However, some (unknown) proportion of business travelers also enjoy the coast for leisure during their visit to coastal areas, such that we assumed all travel and tourism employment was related to tourism and recreation values. Additionally, it is true that not every tourist stays in a hotel and not everyone staying in a hotel is a tourist. Nevertheless, these data are of better quality and closer to what this goal is trying to capture than those used in Global 2012. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The model developed for Global 2012 was changed to use information on hotel employees for each coastal municipality in Brazil. Status was measured for each coastal state as the density of hotel jobs in coastal areas.<br  /><br  />We log-transformed coastal area under the assumption that density of hotel employees is not necessarily a measure of sustainable tourism, but that a balance likely exists between the density of tourists and the absolute number of tourists that a state receives (even if spread out over a larger area). Although the TTCI was included in the model as a measure of sustainability, this value is calculated at the national level, and was therefore applied equally to all states. Due to this, it has no effect on differences between regions within Brazil. The model could be improved if a state-specific index assessing sustainability of coastal tourism were available.<br  /><br  />The reference value used was the highest status value across all states over the time series, which was Rio de Janeiro in 2011. | The goal model for Brazil assumes that the majority of coastal hotels are located in proximity to the shoreline, and that the number of hotel employees is directly proportional to the volume of tourists an area receives. A report evaluating drivers of tourism in Brazil found a significant positive relationship between number of tourists and number of hotels; here we incorporate hotel employees which is likely a more sensitive metric, given that hotels can vary greatly in size and economic changes are likely to be reflected more quickly in number of jobs than number of hotel establishments. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | At this scale we were able to make use of detailed studies documenting the changes in participation in 19 different marine and coastal specific recreational activities over time. These data come from the National Survey on Recreation and the Environment (NSRE), which has been conducted 8 times nationally since 1960, with the most recent data available for coastal and marine specific activities from 2000. These observations were used to produce a predictive model that was employed to estimate participation rates in recent years, because the survey data were no longer being collected.<br  /><br  />This model employs a temporal reference point, comparing current status to the status in the year 2000. | For the tourism and recreation goal we developed an approach that took advantage of time series data on participation in a range of coastal and marine tourism and recreational activities. Participation rates more closely matched the intent of this goal and were a more robust proxy than international tourist arrivals data, i.e., the proxy used in Global 2012. We also changed the tourism and recreation reference point from spatial (used in the global analysis, where having values from >170 assessed regions made this reasonable) to temporal (given availability of time-series and limited scope for spatial comparisons). |

#### Reference points for **Tourism and Recreation**

The reference point used will depend upon the types of data incorporated into the model.

> Tip: one option for **Tourism and Recreation** reference points is to establish targets for domestic and foreign visitors to various tourism activities.

***
