### Practical Considerations for Habitat-based Goals

>Habitat-based goals can be approached together in the data gathering process. Habitats appear in such goals as **Carbon Storage**, **Coastal Protection**, and **Biodiversity**. Your approach will largely depend on the type of data you have.

*Ideal Approach*

Ideally, information on the extent and condition of every single habitat type would be available. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely be temporal. This means that historic data are needed such that current habitat and value data can be compared to historic data. This could also be achieved by using or a proportion of historic data.

*Practical Guidance*

The first thing to consider with habitats is **what habitats are in your area**. You should consider what habitats are in your coastal regions as well as your offshore regions throughout your EEZ. Are there mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, salt marshes, sea ice, or subtidal soft-bottom habitats? Are there kelp forests in your waters?

Once you determine what habitats are in your area, you should also consider **their range extent within your reporting regions**. You should consider whether and how far they go offshore and inland. You will likely use a combination of clipped spatial data and spatial data for whole regions, depending on the goal being assessed. For instance, the **Habitat** sub-goal of **Biodiversity** uses the entire region for habitats such as coral reefs in the calculation, but the **Coastal Protection** only uses the extent to 1 kilometer offshore and inland to 1 kilometer <!---Check---> This will affect the preparation of the spatial data layers later in you assessment.

> For instance, do mangroves occur in river deltas in your area, and if so, how far upriver do they go? In the 2013 Global Assessment, for example, mangrove was assessed from 1 kilometer offshore to 1 kilometer inland, but this distance is variable and could change for you OHI+ assessments. It depends on your geography.

Several factors for habitats will have to be considered. In score calculations, habitats are weighted in different ways based on the amount of protection they provide and the amount carbon they sequester, and they are also derived from estimations of habitat health and condition (See **Carbon Storage**, **Coastal Protection**, and **Biodiversity**). The weights of the habitats relative to each other comes from the literature. If you have access to regional-specific studies, you should use try to use that information. Otherwise, the Global data layers can be used as a secondary option.

When thinking about condition, for instance, coral health is based on the percentage of "living cover" on a reef relative to the potential range of the reef.

> In the Global Assessment, coral reference points used the mean predicted values for a country from 1985-1987. When this data was not available for a country, we used the value of neighboring countries. There was also some analyses to control for the fact that the % live coral cover naturally varies over time, hence the use of "predicted values".

> In the 2012 Global Assessment, soft-bottom habitat had an estimated status based on the "intensity of trawl fishing" as a proxy.

It is also important to think about the temporal aspect of your habitats. This will affect the **trend** and the choice of the **reference point**. Trend is the change in health or condition over time. However, this might be constrained by data availability due to the heterogeneity of habitat types and data sources. Ideally, there will be enough years of data to directly calculate the recent change in health of the habitat by using a linear model to calculate trend. This isn't always the case, and proxies or estimates might need to be used. For example, due to spotty salt marsh data we created trend categories of increasing (0.5), stable (0), and decreasing (-0.5) based on available data.

> For example, for sea ice in the Global Assessment, a linear model was set to a metric of sea ice cover for data from 2006-2011, after some smoothing to account for natural variation.

Overall, the historical **reference point** is particularly important for the habitat goals. What's the ideal reference point, however? You could consider setting the reference point further back in history if you have the data for it. This would assume there was a more pristine condition in the past, and would be based on the assumption that habitat destruction has been and still is occurring. Here it is useful to use the S.M.A.R.T. principles (See **Conceptual Guide**). It is highly encouraged to set an ambitious reference point, and deviate from those which were set in the Global.

****

#### Ready to start the **Carbon Storage** goal?

*Ideal Approach*

Ideally,  information would be available to allow you to to assess the amount of carbon stored in every coastal habitat in your area. The best information would show area covered and some measure of the quality of the habitat for this goal. For example, a dense mangrove forest would be better quality than a sparse mangrove forest. Additionally, different weights would be assigned to the habitats based on their relative ability to store carbon, and this factor could be used to penalize areas where there is greater loss of carbon and reward areas where this is a greater storage of carbon. The carbon storage model could then incorporate such weights in a similar way to the **Coastal Protection** goal. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely be temporal in most cases. This means that historic data are needed so that current habitat values can be compared to a past state.

>TIP: Understanding habitat carbon storage rates is an area of ongoing research. The capacity for habitats to store carbon varies, and depends on the morphology of plants in the system.

*Practical Guidance*

The model and approach for **Carbon Storage** developed for the Global assessment will likely be appropriate for independent assessments. Knowing the area and the condition of of carbon-storing habitats are the two components that are most important. It is important to spend time looking for a way to quantify condition, but it may not be possible to find.

One of the first decisions for your team to make is **whether to use the given data** in the Global Assessments or **to find and use a better dataset**. Even though your goal model shouldn't change entirely from the Global, you should find more localized data than the global data, because the global data layers have already been processed and include clipped regions that reduce the specificity of the information for your area. This is because in the default WebApp methods, the habitat area was calculated by using the global areal coverage of the habitat weighted by the size of the offshore area of the region. This is not consistent currently in the WebApps; for example, if you look at [the given layers a WebApp](https://github.com/OHI-Science/col/blob/draft/subcountry2014/layers/hab_extent_gl2014.csv), you will see that the same values are applied to all regions. You should think here, however, of how your regions' size compare to any spatial dataset's scale, and return to the question of spatial coverage once you are thinking about the **reference points** farther on.

> Questions to consider: Do you have maps, for example, that show current habitat distributions and maps that show historical habitat distributions?  If so, you could extract that data for each of your regions to get a current and reference area. You could also use summarized habitat data that exists in tables or are already compiled in another source.

The types of habitat data you search for also matter. It is recommended to search for mangroves, saltmarshes, and sea grasses because these are viewed as carbon-sequestering habitats that are both ecologically threatened and sensitive to policy responses.  You should remember that we recommend using habitats that can store carbon on the order of 100 years, thereby limiting the types of habitat types you will need. This would also affect other kinds of indicator considerations not discussed in the Global Assessments, such as chlorophyll abundance.

> TIP:, if you look at your default data on the WebApp, you will see **Carbon Storage** information presented for **mangroves**, **salt marshes**, and **sea grass** even if there are no mangroves in your area. You will not be scored on these if they are not in your area.

The second group of items to consider are the **condition** and **carbon contribution**. **Condition** is more essential than **contribution** in this case because it is a more direct measure of ecosystem health and would give a more accurate score for this goal. **Condition** means . It can be measured by a number of ways, often indirectly through studies on density of the habitats, disease affecting the particular habitats, or other impacts such as change in species composition or growth rates from impacts such as overgrazing. Has there been a study assessing habitat integrity or health specifically in your area? **Contribution** is how much each habitat stores relatively to the others--such as the rates of carbon uptake as measured by empirical data. For this you would have to go to the literature and find ratios of organic nutrient uptake between habitats, and you would have to make sure these studies are done correctly to represent your area. For example, were the studies done with a young mangrove forest, or an older one, which might have different growth rates?

> In the 2012 Global Assessment, the condition of mangroves was assessed as, "Current square kilometers of mangrove coverage divided by the reference hectares, calculated from 1980 to 2005. Seagrass condition was calculated as, "Current percent cover, or hectares, of habitat divided by the reference percentage cover, or hectares from 1975 to 2010."  <!---See Table S7, Supplementary Information, Halpern et al. 2012, p. 24. Note that interestingly it does say salt marsh "condition" was calculated by an increasing or stable trend (value = 1), or by a decreasing trend (value = 0.5). Excluded it because it seems like an estimation.--->

A vital consideration for this goal is **the reference point**. It is an important decision to be made based on good science given the limitations of available data. The reference point is the extent of the habitat at some time in the past, in other words the ideal condition. You will need historical data for this--either from satellites, published papers, or even hand-drawn maps. For questions of sustainability, you must consider, what is a good year to set as your historical past extent? The reference year should be identified based on SMART principles, particularly that it is an ambitious goal, but also realistic. If you do not have trend data, you will have to use a proxy for the trend.

> In the U.S. West Coast assessment (2014), researchers went to the local public library to find hand-drawn maps of historical salt marsh extents in California.

In this case, perhaps your choice of historical reference point may be guided by a policy target as well. For example, are there any climate change policies in your area, with defined targets and objectives? Are there any restoration or carbon storage projects in your area? Do any organizations offer guidance on the amount of carbon storage your management policies should be aiming for?

#### Ready to start on **Coastal Protection**?

> **Coastal Protection** aims to assess the amount of protection provided by marine and coastal habitats against flooding and erosion to coastal areas that people value.

*Ideal Approach*

Ideally, data for all habitats within a region would be available, as well as information on the value of the land and the vulnerability of inhabitants being protected by these habitats. This requires data for habitat type at high spatial resolution  as well as a measure of the value of what is protected by the habitats. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely be a temporal baseline; this means that historic data are needed such that current habitat and value data can be compared to them.

*Practical Guidance*

The areas relevant to this goal include both inhabited places, such as homes and other structures, and uninhabited places such as parks and special places. However, no credit is given for sea-walls, because they are not regarded as sustainable. At local and regional scales data may exist on all these variables at a high enough resolution to map and calculate exactly which habitats are providing how much protection to which coastal areas. You must first decide which data sources to use for your maps. Do you have spatially-explicit satellite data? If so, how far back in time does it go? The data consideration will be a consideration when you set the reference points.

> In the U.S. West Coast assessment (2014), researchers went to the local public library to find hand-drawn maps of historical sand-dunes in California, for example, in order to find information for sand dune extent in the 1850s.

In addition, one might want to know the level of vulnerability of the different coastal communities. Vulnerability can be quantified as the ability to evacuate, fragility of constructions, economic ability to reconstruct in case of damage. The the reason this is done is to prioritize the protection of certain locations. Physical properties may be available in regional studies, allowing for more a detailed understanding of the protective ability, and likelihood of exposure for each habitat type in different portions of the coastline.

As with the other habitat-based goals, you will need to make careful decisions about your reference point. It's an important decision to be made based on good science given the limitations of available data. The reference point is the extent of the habitat at some time in the past, in other words the ideal condition. You will need historical data for this--either from satellites, published papers, or even hand-drawn maps. For questions of sustainability, you must consider, what is a good year to set as your historical past extent? Do you want to be ambitious and set it far in the past, so it gets closer to a more "pristine" condition? Or do you want to make it represent human use? Will it make your scores look better or worse if you choose a more recent or more distant example?

#### Linking Habitats and Biodiversity

It is important to think about how habitat relate to the **Biodiversity** goal. The current approach tracks **Species** and **Habitats** separately because of imperfect data for **Species**. In other words, habitats are an estimation of the health of the species in an area. Therefore if you have comprehensive species assessments in your area you wouldn’t need the **Habitat** sub-goal. However, the inventory of marine biodiversity may not often be sufficiently complete in your area.

You should also think about the linkages between the habitat-based goals, such as **Carbon Storage** and **Coastal Protection**, and the pressures and resilience. Does the encroachment or reduction of these habitats have an effect on carbon sequestration, or does it change ecosystem composition sufficiently to impact species? Could habitats have an effect on **Clean Waters**, or are they impacted more by local pollution than other impacts? If habitats change for natural reasons, you might not need to worry about their pressures on other goals, but if they consist of introduced species, you should think about the effects on other goals.

> For example, the invasive marsh plants such as *Spartina* may afford some Carbon Storage, but it’s a non-native habitat to an area such as the San Francisco Bay. It could still count towards the **Carbon Storage** goal, but would also be a pressure on **Biodiversity**.


#### History of the Approaches

*Carbon Storage Goal*

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | The status of Carbon Storage is measured as a function of its current ‘condition’ relative to a reference condition and a variable that weights the relative contribution of each habitat type to total carbon storage (measured as the amount of area each habitat covers relative to the total area covered by all three habitats given the available data). In Global 2012, the coastal ecosystems assessed were seagrasses, tidal marshes and mangroves.<br  /><br  />Reference conditions were set as the current condition or area of coastal plant habitat coverage relative to that in ~1980. This is not a very ambitious reference point, but the best that the data would allow. | We focused on three coastal habitats known to provide meaningful amounts of carbon storage: mangroves, seagrasses, and salt marshes. For mangroves, we included the whole extent of the coastal forests, including the parts on land or in river deltas, since these too provide significant additional amounts of carbon storage. | A score of 100 would indicate that the percent cover (and health, when measured) of each habitat had not changed since the date set as reference point (the 1980s or pre-industrial coverage, depending on the assessment used).
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point were the same as in Global 2012. There were improvements in data processing were.<br  /><br  />The reference point was the same as Global 2012. | Mangrove data used in the goal model were processed differently than described in Global 2012: data now include 1km inland in addition to 1km offshore. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The goal model was the same as in Global 2012.<br  /><br  />The reference condition was determined specifically for each habitat type. For salt marshes the reference year is 1975. For mangroves, we knew the current (2010) extent per state, but only had a total country extent for the reference year (1980). We apportioned the total reported mangrove extent for Brazil in 1980 by state using a linear regression model that estimates the percent of mangrove loss per state. Data to assess current and reference condition for seagrasses did not meet minimum data requirements: they were available only for three sites in Brazil within the time period 2002-2010 (no data for a reference condition). For this reason, we used available data from adjacent EEZs (countries in the South Atlantic) and used georegional averages as current condition and reference condition values for Brazil. A linear model was fitted to the data for all countries, and the mean of predicted values for 1979-1981 was used as the reference condition, and the mean of predicted values of the three most recent years (2008, 2009, 2010) was used as the current condition. | The same approach was used as in Global 2012, with local data used as available. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | We used reconstructions of historic extents compared to current habitat coverage to set more ambitious targets. However, the historical reconstructions did not include information on habitat health so only extent was used in this assessment.<br  /><br  />Reliable, comprehensive habitat extent data prior to the 1990s are unavailable for most coastal regions within the U.S. Estimates of habitat loss since European settlement have been extrapolated in some regions for some habitats. However, while the habitat extent from the 1990s would represent a very un-ambitious target, a pre-industrialized reference point for habitat extent is considered an unrealistic goal under current conditions. To establish our temporal reference points we instead set our reference uniquely for each habitat, as a percentage of pre-industrialized habitat coverage for salt marshes, as habitat extent between the 1950s and 1960s for sand dunes, or utilized pressures on habitats as a proxy of habitat condition for seagrasses and soft bottom habitats. | Only two out of the three habitats considered in the global analysis were included here: salt marshes and seagrass beds. Mangroves are not found in the US West Coast and are not included in this assessment. |

*Coastal Protection Goal*

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | The status of this goal was calculated to be a function of the amount and/or condition (depending on data availability) of marine habitat(s) relative to their reference states and the ranked protective ability of each habitat type. Rank weights for the protective ability of each habitat come from previous work that ranks mangroves, corals and sea ice as 4, salt marshes as 3, and seagrasses as 1, where higher values are better.<br  /><br  />The reference point compares the current extent and condition of five key habitats that protect coastlines (mangrove forests, seagrass meadows, salt marshes, tropical coral reefs, and sea ice) from flooding and erosion relative to their condition in the early 1980's. | At global scales, fine-scale habitat data do not exist and so we focused on EEZ-scale assessments, even though this scale does not allow one to account for the spatial configuration of habitats relative to coastal areas and the vulnerability of human coastal communities. Consequently, we assumed that all coastal areas have equal value and equal vulnerability and assessed the total area and condition of key habitats within each EEZ (without regard to their precise location). The habitats that provide protection to coastal areas from inundation and erosion and for which we have global data include mangroves, coral reefs, seagrasses, salt marshes, and sea ice. | A score of 100 would indicate that these habitats are all still intact or have been restored to the reference condition (i.e. their extent during the early 1980’s if using Global 2012, or 50% of their extent for some of the habitats in US West Coast, etc.). Any score below 100 indicates that these habitats have declined in coverage or in health since then, with lower scores indicating more significant declines, and stronger penalties for declines in habitats with high protection ability (e.g. mangroves in Global 2012).
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point were the same as in Global 2012. | Same as Global 2012. |
**Brazil (2014)** | Same goal model as Global 2012, using local data.<br  /><br  />To calculate the reference state for coral reef status within Brazil we lacked a minimum of two data points within the time period 1980-1995 (which was considered the acceptable range to use as “reference” years). We therefore estimated the status as the averages of scores from 24 countries within the Caribbean ecoregion that had sufficient coral data. For each of those countries, we fitted a linear model to the data available, pooled across all sampled sites, and we defined the ‘current’ condition (health) as the mean of the predicted values for 2008-2010, and the reference condition as the mean of the predicted values for 1985-1987. | Area was measured for each coastal state as the 12 nmi jurisdiction boundary for each habitat type. For mangroves we focused only on the most coastal portion of mangrove forests as they are the main source of coastal protection. For seagrasses we used the total reported extent of seagrasses in Brazil divided by the coastal area of each state. For coral reefs we calculated the extent per coastal waters of each state using maps of coral reef distribution. The salt marsh extents for Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul states are from national statistics. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | Same as Global 2012, with more ambitious reference points for target habitat coverage.<br  /><br  />Reliable, comprehensive habitat extent data prior to the 1990s are unavailable for most coastal regions within the U.S. Estimates of habitat loss since European settlement have been extrapolated in some regions for some habitats. However, while the habitat extent from the 1990s would represent a very un-ambitious target, a pre-industrialized reference point for habitat extent is considered an unrealistic goal under current conditions. To establish our temporal reference points we instead set our reference uniquely for each habitat, as a percentage of pre-industrialized habitat coverage for salt marshes, as habitat extent between the 1950s and 1960s for sand dunes, or utilized pressures on habitats as a proxy of habitat condition for seagrasses and soft bottom habitats. | In the U.S. west coast we measured the role of salt marshes, seagrasses, and sand dunes as these habitats provide the most significant and measurable amount of coastal protection and had data available to include. |

*Habitat sub-goal of Biodiversity*

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | The status of the Habitat sub-goal was assessed for all habitats for which at least some global data were available, specifically: mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, salt marshes, sea ice edge, and subtidal soft-bottom habitats. Status was assessed as the average of the condition estimates for each habitat present in a region.<br  /><br  />In the global study, the current condition of salt marshes, seagrasses, mangroves and corals was compared to a reference year that is intended to represent optimal conditions (1980 for salt marshes and sand dunes, varied by site for seagrasses). We generally considered the reference years to be between 1980-1995 and the current years to be between 2001-2010, although these varied by habitat due to data availability. | A significant amount of pre-processing of the habitat data was needed to fill data gaps and resolve data quality issues (see the data layers section for details on data sources). Because consistent habitat monitoring data were unavailable for many regions, anomalous values can occur. | A score of 100 would indicate that habitat coverage had not reduced when compared to the temporal reference point.
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point were the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2013. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The goal model was the same as as Global 2012 for mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, salt marshes, and subtidal soft-bottom habitats.<br  /><br  />The timeframes between current and reference condition vary across habitats, but we generally used a 20-year gap. However, it is important to bear in mind that we were able to obtain only a few time-series in which habitat health was resampled through time, so that information from a few point estimates had to be used to infer the health of a large and highly heterogeneous region. | The approach was the same as Global 2012. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | Same as Global 2012 for salt marshes, seagrasses, sand dunes, and soft-bottom habitats. Additionally, when assessing habitat condition, we used reconstructions of historic extents to set more ambitious targets.<br  /><br  />To establish our temporal reference points we instead set our reference uniquely for each habitat, as a percentage of pre-industrialized habitat coverage for salt marshes, as habitat extent between the 1950s and 1960s for sand dunes, or we utilized pressures on habitats as a proxy of habitat condition for seagrasses and soft bottom habitats. | Reliable, comprehensive habitat extent data prior to the 1990s are unavailable for most coastal regions within the U.S. Estimates of habitat loss since European settlement have been extrapolated in some regions for some habitats. However, while the habitat extent from the 1990s would represent a very un-ambitious target, a pre-industrialized reference point for habitat extent is considered an unrealistic goal under current conditions. To establish our temporal reference points we instead set our reference uniquely for each habitat, as a percentage of pre-industrialized habitat coverage for salt marshes; and as habitat extent between the 1950s and 1960s for sand dunes. We utilized pressures on habitats as a proxy of habitat condition for seagrasses and soft bottom habitats. |

****
