### Practical Considerations for Economic Goals and Tourism

> The **Coastal Livelihoods and Economies** goal rewards productive coastal economies that avoid the loss of ocean-dependent livelihoods while maximizing livelihood quality. The **Tourism and Recreation** goal captures the value people have for experiencing and taking pleasure in coastal areas.

Some goals in your assessment will draw from economic information. Such goals that you can approach together include the **Livelihoods and Economies** and **Tourism and Recreation** goals. If you have sub-goals for these, you will have to decide how to weight them in the goal score. If you find jobs, wages, and revenue data broadly, you will have to decide how to apportion it appopriately between **Livelihoods and Economies** and **Tourism and Recreation** given their different philosophies.

In your regional assessment, there is the opportunity to study the behavior of economic trends in your area. You can examine time-series with greater detail and, for example, establish a different time-periods that reflect economic cycles in your area, or even process the data to eliminate the “noise” from fluctuations and capture more persistent trends. You also have the chance to factor in the sustainability of the jobs--something that has not yet been done in the Global Approach.

> TIP: **You will most likely simplify the given Global models.** This is because you will be looking at local economic scales, you likely will not need to adjust for currency differences, for example, as was done in the Global Assessment through such metrics as the Consumer Price Index and Purchasing Power Parity.

In your regional assessment, there is the opportunity to study the behavior of economic trends in your area. You can examine time-series with greater detail and, for example, establish a different time-periods that reflect economic cycles in your area, or even process the data to eliminate the “noise” from fluctuations and capture more persistent trends.

#### Ready to start on **Livelihoods?**

> The **Livelihoods** sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality.

Ideally, this sub-goal would speak to the quality and quantity of marine jobs in an area. It would encompass all the marine sectors that supply jobs and wages to coastal communities, incorporating information on the sustainability of different sectors while also telling about the working conditions and job satisfaction. The jobs and revenue produced from marine-related industries directly benefit those who are employed, and also those who gain indirect value from related economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy, such as community identity and tax revenue. You should capture the indirect as well as direct benefits from jobs, wages and revenue from coastal communities.

*Practical Guidance*

The first step of this goal is to **identify the marine-related sectors in your area**. There are jobs that are directly connected to the marine environment, such as shipping, fishing, longshore workers, but also some that are connected indirectly, such as supplies and supporting industries.

> For example, the sectors for which data were found in the Global Assessment included tourism, commercial fishing, marine mammal watching, aquarium fishing, water and tidal energy jobs, mariculture, transportation and shipping, ports and harbors, ship and boatbuilding. Much of the data on wages came from the International Labour Organization.

After you have identified which jobs are in your area, you will want to find some **measure of their direct and indirect benefits**.There are two broad kinds of data you should be looking for. The first are direct data that feed into the model equations. These are jobs and wages data for the direct benefits of jobs. This includes the number of jobs in each area, and the wages or income for such jobs. You could find such information from you local national statistical office, or economics bureau, for example. The second are data that show the indirect benefits of these jobs to the local communities. This can be found directly or  indirectly through the use of economic multipliers. With multipliers you can attempt to estimate the revenue generated by jobs more broadly associated with marine sectors. It's encouraged to use economic multipliers from the literature.

> You can multiply the number of fishermen by an economic multiplier to estimate larger economic effects. This is because the fishing industry provides indirect jobs beyond just the jobs of the fishermen, ranging from gear manufacturing companies to restaurants and movie theaters where the fishermen spend their income.

Next you must think about how to use the data to **infer quality and quantity of jobs**. Do you have the old format of data going back in time? If so, can you check to see how wages per sector have changed over time? If all of the sectors change in the same way, for instance, they might show broader economic trends that you could use to project forward per sector per country to find a likely future state and infer relationships between them.

#### Ready to Start on **Economies**?

*Ideal Approach*

> The **Economies** sub-goal captures the economic value associated with marine industries using revenue from marine sectors.

Ideally, economic data would be collected coastally, and traced from sectors both directly and indirectly related to marine industries. When these data are not available it is possible to use revenue data at a larger scale and adapt them to a coastal area based on population distribution. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving window temporal approach.

*Practical Guidance*

You should be searching for these data at the same time as the **Livelihoods** sub-goal, because of the similarities of the data sources. You need to mainly find revenue data for the marine sectors in your area, after you have already identified the sectors.

*Reference Points for the Economic Goals*

| L&E component | Type of Reference | Point Example
|-----|-----|-----|
| Number of jobs | Temporal | Current number of jobs minus number of jobs five years before |
| Wages | Spatial | Highest observed value across reporting units |
| Revenue | Temporal| Current revenue compared to past revenue |

Because there are no absolute reference points for these goals, you will have to make the reference points relative to the given information. If you are following the Global approach, the reference points in **Livelihoods** sub-goal should be set as temporal approach comparing current to past conditions; they could also be done a spatial comparison to compare regions to the highest observed incomes in your area. In the **Economies** sub-goal, revenue has a moving target temporal comparison; we highly recommend that this remains a temporal comparison so that a specific place is compared to its performance in the past and not to anywhere else.

It is highly recommended that you keep the reference point for jobs as a temporal comparison, and only using a spatial comparison for wages.  Comparing the number of jobs across different places, for instance, would require at the very least adjusting values by the size of the workforce in each location.

One way to do the temporal comparison is to have a moving-window approach by comparing the value in the current year to values in previous years. If using a temporal approach, you must consider how far back in time to go. The Global Assessments used a five-year moving-window because it is intended to capture short-term changes in the trajectory. But then you must consider, would five or ten years accurately represent economic trends, or would it be skewed by the effects of an economic downtown? If there is a not economic downturn, do you want to reward an increasing number of jobs, or reward maintaining the same number of jobs--in other words, not losing any jobs?

> Your choice may differ depending on the given economic growth rate of your country. Are there policy targets in place for growth? Or has growth leveled out, and you wish to maintain livelihood quantity overall?

Lastly you will have to *combine the sub-goals*. You can weight the two sub-goals unequally if, for example, the number of jobs was considered more important than the wages rendered.

#### History of the Approaches

***Livelihoods***

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | This sub-goal is measured as the number of direct and indirect jobs across sectors within a region plus the average purchasing power parity (PPP)-adjusted wages within each sector. Jobs are summed across sectors and measured at current and reference time points. Wages are averaged across sectors within each region and the reference value is taken from the region with the highest average wages across all sectors.<br  /><br  />In the livelihoods sub-goal, jobs had a moving target temporal comparison and wages had a spatial comparison. The reference point for jobs (and for the economies sub-goal) is a moving baseline because there is no established target for number of jobs (and setting a specific target number of jobs would be completely arbitrary). In these cases it is important to compare the same place to itself in the past, and not to compare it to a different place. Therefore, the objective of the jobs component is actually no loss of jobs. In addition, we want to ensure that we are detecting changes that are specific to marine-related sectors. Jobs must keep pace with growth in employment rates or sustain losses no greater than national increases in unemployment rates. For wages we assumed the target value for average annual wages is the highest value observed across all reporting units. | We assumed that sector-specific job and revenue multipliers are static and globally consistent, but distinct for developed versus developing regions (when such information was available), because we do not have data to resolve temporal or regional differences. For all other sectors where the data sources only provided direct jobs or direct revenue, we used sector- and development status-specific multipliers derived from the literature to estimate total job or revenue impacts. We did not apply multiplier values to wages since the cascading effects of earned income are more contentious. To account for broader economic forces that may affect jobs independent of changes in ocean health (e.g., a global recession), we adjusted (as noted above) relative values for the number of jobs by changes in national employment rates.<br  /><br  />While job identity has social and cultural value, there are not adequate data to track individual workers and assess their job satisfaction on a global scale. Also because of data constraints, this goal does not provide more credit for sectors or economic activities that are more ecologically sustainable. | A score of 100 would indicate that the number of marine jobs had not reduced relative to that number five years previous, and that the wages in the area were the highest anywhere.
**Global 2013** | Based on Global 2012, with some simplifications: Since many of the values were not available in 2010, older wages data were divided by the inflation conversion factor for 2010 so that wage data across years would be comparable in 2010 US dollars. These data were also multiplied by the purchasing power parity-adjusted per capita GDP (PPPpcGDP). Jobs data were adjusted by dividing by total number of people employed for the corresponding year: (1 – percent unemployment) * total labor force. This factor ensures that any changes detected are strictly due to marine-related dynamics and not driven by national macroeconomic events across all sectors, marine and not. One of the adjustment terms previously used was considered redundant and removed: an additional factor had previously been used to modify the wages data, obtained from the International Labour Organization (ILO).<br  /><br  />The reference point was the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012 except for a few simplified multipliers. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The model and reference point were the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | This goal follows the same model as in Global 2012, but using local data with a slightly different list of sectors. Data came from the National Ocean Economics Program (NOEP); sectors include: living resources, tourism and recreation, shipping and transport, marine related construction, and ship and boat building/repair. For each of these sub-components we use sector-specific multipliers derived from the NOEP data so that we assess both direct and indirect effects. We recognize that sectors and economic activity within a region can be influenced by activities outside the region (e.g., fish caught in Alaska could be brought to Washington for processing, or vice-versa), thus leading to an over or under estimate economic benefits derived from marine ecosystems within the study region. As with any ecosystem study, defining boundaries for the ecosystem is an artificial operation, and linkages with external elements necessarily exist but are challenging to account for.<br  /><br  />The reference point was the same as in Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012. |

***Economies***

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | This sub-goal is captured as the total adjusted revenue generated directly and indirectly from each sector (measured in 2010 USD), at current and reference time points.<br  /><br  />In the economies sub-goal, revenue had a moving target temporal comparison. Because there is no absolute reference point for revenue, this sub-goal employs a moving baseline. We made a correction to revenue based on a region's GDP (“no loss and must keep pace with growth in GDP or can sustain losses comparable to national declines in GDP”). The current and reference years used for unemployment and GDP data were based on the average current year and average reference year across the sector data sources used for number of jobs and revenue, respectively. | We assumed that sector-specific job and revenue multipliers are static and globally consistent, but distinct for developed versus developing regions (when such information was available), because we do not have data to resolve temporal or regional differences. For all other sectors where the data sources only provided direct jobs or direct revenue, we used sector- and development status-specific multipliers derived from the literature to estimate total job or revenue impacts. We did not apply multiplier values to wages since the cascading effects of earned income are more contentious. | A score of 100 would indicate that revenue has not decreased compared to its value five years previous.
**Global 2013** | The model was same as Global 2012, with a few simplifications:  revenue data were adjusted by dividing by GDP per region (reported in 2013 USD; data from the World Bank).<br  /><br  />The reference point was the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012, although simplified where appropriate. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The model and reference point were the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | The model and reference point were the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012. |

****

#### Ready to start on **Tourism and Recreation**?

> This goal will necessarily draw from different data sources than the Global Assessment, and so it is encourage to look at what other OHI+ and regional assessments have done. This goal demonstrates the flexibility of the OHI+ approach, so you are encouraged to think creatively.

*Ideal Approach*

> The **Tourism and Recreation** goal captures the value people have for experiencing and taking pleasure in coastal areas.

Ideally, you would find information for how the ocean in your area is used and enjoyed by local residents and tourists alike, thereby capturing the full range of values and touristic and recreational activities. Models will vary because there are many ways to potentially measure the delivery of this goal. The type of reference point used will depend on the data available.

*Practical Guidance*

Your approach will be different than the Global Assessments. In fact, the **Tourism and Recreation** goal shows how flexible the OHI+ approach is to adapting models with improved data or approaches.  It could be approached economically, and combined in the data searching for the **Livelihoods and Economies** goal, or done in another manner. You can get creative with your approach, and you are encouraged to read the previous OHI regional studies, such as the U.S. West Coast Assessment (2014) and Brazil Assessment (2014), since examples are best studied for guidance here.

> For example, in the Brazil Assessment (2014), the density of hotel employees per state was used as a metric to determine how well touristed coastal areas were. This was better than using international travel information, as was used in the Global Assessment, because for a large country like Brazil, internal travel would not have been accounted for.

There are potentially dozens of variables that affect the number of people that engage in tourism and recreation within a region and where they go, including local and global economies, infrastructure to support the activities, promotion of particular locations, safety and security, political stability, and so on. If you can't find information on visitors, can you find information on access as a proxy for visitors? Do people have access to boating areas, or to surfing spots?

> TIP: If you already have access information for **Artisanal Opportunities**, that would not be double-counting here.

Because we currently do not know which variables matter and to what degree, or have data for many of these variables, we instead assume that tourists distribute themselves within a region proportional to where local populations are. This means that populated areas get a greater proportion of the tourists, so you can use population data to distribute other kinds of data you may find.

*Reference Points*

The reference point used will depend upon the types of data incorporated into the model. Does your country have growth rate targets? Do you want to increase tourism, or instead ensure it does not decline?

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | Data on international arrivals were used as a proxy for the value of tourism and recreation in each region, as this was the most comprehensive data available on a global scale. Additionally, the length of each tourist’s stay in a region was incorporated: we used tourist-days as the measure for this goal because some locations, especially remote ones, may receive fewer arrivals but tourists may stay for longer periods of time. We therefore multiplied the number of arrivals by the average length of stay in order to incorporate this information. Sustainability was incorporated by using the tourism competitiveness index (TTCI) from the World Economic Forum to capture the sustainability of the tourism industry. To account for different surface areas and number of inhabitants across regions, the tourist-day values were adjusted by local population size. <br  /><br  />Global 2012 used a spatial comparison reference point that compares each region to the best performing regions. | It is very difficult to have a quantitative measure of whether people are fully taking advantage of recreation opportunities offered by marine and coastal environments. We assumed that the amount of international arrivals (although this ignores domestic travel and recreation), however, could be informative of the desirability of a coastal location and that this must have some relation with the health of the system. We use a spatial comparison reference point that compares each region to the best performing regions. In order to compare different regions, we standardize by dividing the arrivals by the region’s population. <br  /><br  />Few non-economic indicators of tourism and recreation exist at the global scale, and thus the original approach in Global 2012 approximated this goal measuring the number of international tourists arriving by airline to coastal regions, accounting for their average length of stay, and adjusting by the region’s population size. This approach was sub-optimal because it did not account for domestic tourism, which is a large part of tourism in many regions. Also, since we only had information about total arrivals, not just those of people who were intending to spend time on the coast, we standardized by dividing by the total population, not just the coastal inhabitants, which tended to penalize especially large regions with large stretches of inhabited inland areas such as Canada, Australia and the USA.<br  /><br  />We log-transformed the status scores because of an extremely exponential distribution of scores driven by a few regions with much higher tourism rates relative to population size. Even after this transformation the distribution of scores remained strongly exponential and so we rescaled scores to the value of the 90th percentile region, which was 25% of the maximum score. The 17 regions above this score were all given status scores = 1.0. | A score of 100 in US West Coast would indicate that tourism in a specific place has not declined compared to its value in the reference year. In other assessments this would indicate that a value was not lower than the region with the highest score.
**Global 2013** | We calculated the proportion of direct employment in the tourism industry relative to total labor force. As in Global 2012, we used the tourism competitiveness index (TTCI) from the World Economic Forum to capture the socio-economic sustainability of the tourism industry.<br  /><br  />To determine the reference point, we identified the best scoring region across all years and rescaled all other regions across all years to that score (Bonaire; 2011, which was the most recent year of data). The high-scoring regions were outliers in the distribution of scores (the second best performing region scored 40 and the third scored 28); we therefore rescaled all scores to the 90th percentile score. All regions above this score received a status score of 100. | We created a new model different from Global 2012 by using employment in the tourism sector as a reasonable proxy measure for the total number of people engaged in coastal tourism and recreation activities. Employment within this sector should respond dynamically to the number of people participating in tourist activities, based on the assumption that the number of hotel employees, travel agents and employees of other affiliated professions will increase or decrease with changing tourism demand within different regions.<br  /><br  />Ideally there would be data available specifically for employment in coastal tourism industries, however the best data available at a global scale report total number of jobs, not just coastal jobs, within the travel and tourism industries. These data include jobs that are directly connected to the tourism and travel industry (i.e. for both leisure and business), including accommodation services, food and beverage services, retail trade, transportation services, and cultural, sports and recreational services, but exclude investment industries and suppliers. Unfortunately it was not possible to determine the proportion of jobs affiliated with strictly leisure travel. However, some (unknown) proportion of business travelers also enjoy the coast for leisure during their visit to coastal areas, such that we assumed all travel and tourism employment was related to tourism and recreation values. Additionally, it is true that not every tourist stays in a hotel and not everyone staying in a hotel is a tourist. Nevertheless, these data are of better quality and closer to what this goal is trying to capture than those used in Global 2012. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The model developed for Global 2012 was changed to use information on hotel employees for each coastal municipality in Brazil. Status was measured for each coastal state as the density of hotel jobs in coastal areas.<br  /><br  />We log-transformed coastal area under the assumption that density of hotel employees is not necessarily a measure of sustainable tourism, but that a balance likely exists between the density of tourists and the absolute number of tourists that a state receives (even if spread out over a larger area). Although the TTCI was included in the model as a measure of sustainability, this value is calculated at the national level, and was therefore applied equally to all states. Due to this, it has no effect on differences between regions within Brazil. The model could be improved if a state-specific index assessing sustainability of coastal tourism were available.<br  /><br  />The reference value used was the highest status value across all states over the time series, which was Rio de Janeiro in 2011. | The goal model for Brazil assumes that the majority of coastal hotels are located in proximity to the shoreline, and that the number of hotel employees is directly proportional to the volume of tourists an area receives. A report evaluating drivers of tourism in Brazil found a significant positive relationship between number of tourists and number of hotels; here we incorporate hotel employees which is likely a more sensitive metric, given that hotels can vary greatly in size and economic changes are likely to be reflected more quickly in number of jobs than number of hotel establishments. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | At this scale we were able to make use of detailed studies documenting the changes in participation in 19 different marine and coastal specific recreational activities over time. These data come from the National Survey on Recreation and the Environment (NSRE), which has been conducted 8 times nationally since 1960, with the most recent data available for coastal and marine specific activities from 2000. These observations were used to produce a predictive model that was employed to estimate participation rates in recent years, because the survey data were no longer being collected.<br  /><br  />This model employs a temporal reference point, comparing current status to the status in the year 2000. | For the tourism and recreation goal we developed an approach that took advantage of time series data on participation in a range of coastal and marine tourism and recreational activities. Participation rates more closely matched the intent of this goal and were a more robust proxy than international tourist arrivals data, i.e., the proxy used in Global 2012. We also changed the tourism and recreation reference point from spatial (used in the global analysis, where having values from >170 assessed regions made this reasonable) to temporal (given availability of time-series and limited scope for spatial comparisons). |

***
