### Practical Considerations for Fisheries Goals

*Ideal Approach*

These goals measure the amount of seafood sustainably harvested in a given region for primarily human consumption. It should include quantity of fish caught by any practice including wild-caught commercial fisheries, mariculture, artisanal-scale fisheries, and recreational fisheries.

*Practical Guidance for OHI+*

When data become available for artisanal or recreational catch, you could include them as part of the **Fisheries** sub-goal of **Food Provision** or as a separate sub-goal depending on the context. Importantly, seafood harvest using unsustainable fishing practices or catch levels is penalized, as the goal aims to maximize the amount of sustainably produced seafood from wild or cultured stocks.

The overall **Food Provision** model should not change. It should always measure whether the seafood from fisheries and mariculture is harvested at maximum carrying capacity and remaining sustainable. The contribution of each practice to the overall score is weighted by its relative contribution to the total seafood yield in your area.

The Global Assessments have studied commercial fisheries and mariculture. If another component were added, for example artisanal fisheries, you might want to consider different options for how to combine them into a weighted indicator. Does one tonne of fish caught through one component mean more than one tonne of fish caught in the others? If there is a rationale to use a different approach, that is entirely possible in the OHI+ framework.

#### Ready to start on **Wild-Caught Fisheries**?

*Ideal Approach*

>The **Wild-Caught Fisheries** sub-goal describes the amount of wild-caught seafood harvested and its sustainability for human consumption.

Ideally, you would find data for catch and effort of every commercial and recreationally-fished species in your area. You would also know the functional relationship between fish population size, or biomass, and fisheries effort, so that maximum sustainable yield (MSY) could be known or calculated. Then, fisheries catch and effort information would be used to calculate the present state and MSY would be used to set the reference point. Current status would be calculated using the present state of every individual species and combining each species together, as the weighted proportion of the total catch.

*Practical Guidance*

Use catch-per-unit effort data if available, and a functional relationship for the reference point. Fisheries modeling using data-poor sources was greatly improved in Global 2013 than the original approach in Global 2012. If your assessment relies solely on catch data, it is highly recommended to use Global 2013 and not Global 2012.

When collecting data on fish landings, it's important to consider how you will divide the data among regions. This was important in the case of a country using fisheries landings data reported at regional ports.  While it was known whether the fish were caught in inner or outer waters, it was also known that the fish reported at those ports were not necessarily caught in those matching particular regions. Boats, after all, go beyond our predefined OHI+ region designations in order to find their catch. So how does one apportion the percentage of catches correctly?

In this case, one option may be to use the information on where the boats are registered. Having the boats assigned to regions might then offer a way to disaggregate the data. So if possible, try to find as much spatial information for this goal as possible.

>If you are following the Global model, you don't want to split the catch among sub-regions; instead, you want to sum catch across all sub-regions, so you can calculate B/Bmsy for the whole population.

#### Ready to start on **Mariculture**?

>**Mariculture** measures the ability to reach the highest levels of seafood gained from far-raised facilities without damaging the ocean's ability to provide fish sustainably now and in the future.

*Ideal Approach*

Ideally, there would be information on the area available for mariculture - physically and/or based on social expectations and priorities - and the sustainability of the mariculture practices. This would mean that assessments had been made to identify the physical coastal and offshore habitat appropriate for each intended type of mariculture species (example: offshore habitats for finfish and shallower habitats for filter-feeding invertebrates) and the areas that have been identified as socially appropriate, since mariculture competes for space with many other ocean uses, including fishing and tourism activities. This approach would not penalize regions that have less geographic area available for mariculture, though places with fewer sheltered bays or lower primary production could be at a disadvantage. The type of reference point used will depend on the data available.

*Practical Guidance*

Setting the reference point for mariculture really depends on regional preferences. This can be very hard to do: in best cases you would incorporate the potential range for mariculture based on habitat suitability for each cultured species, distance from the coast as well as which habitat is suitable, and how much local preference wants to allot to mariculture (versus area apportioned to ports, hotels, beaches, tourism, etc). In Global 2012, without information about social limitations for how much coastal area could be allotted to mariculture, we included the entire area of the coastline, thus assuming that mariculture could be developed everywhere. At a regional scale, better data will allow for restrictions based on habitat, conflicting uses, and social preferences.

#### History of the Approaches

*Fisheries*

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a Score |
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------|
**Global 2012** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was calculated as a function of the absolute difference between a region’s total landed biomass from the reference multi-species maximum sustainable yield weighted by a correction factor that adjusts for taxonomic reporting quality of the data.<br  /><br  />The reference point is based on an estimate of the optimum amount of all marine species that may be caught sustainably, minimizing the likelihood of overfishing while maximizing harvest, i.e. the multispecies MSY (mMSY). This was calculated by summing all the single-species MSY estimates obtained for commercially landed species. The reference point for wild-caught fisheries was set at 25% below mMSY to take into account that mMSY may be overestimated because single-species estimates of MSY obtained under current conditions may change.<br  /><br  />Indeed, when all species are exploited simultaneously, the fishing pressure that each population can withstand might be lower (or higher) due to changes in interactions between species, e.g. if a prey population is reduced, a predator may not be as abundant as predicted by the single species model (or vice versa for the prey species, in the case of a predator species becoming less abundant). By picking a lower reference point, we adopt a precautionary estimate of the total amount of seafood that could be sustainably caught. In other words, the reference point is set so the total landed biomass of wild-caught species will not be more than 75% of the estimated mMSY. Regions are penalized for harvests above or below this reference level (more heavily if above). <br  /><br  /> | At a global scale, catch, effort, and MSY estimates are not available for either commercial, artisanal or recreational fishing: only landings data for commercial fisheries are available through the United Nations Food and Agriculture program (UN FAO). Thus, within the aims of the wild-caught fisheries goal, the ideal approach had to be modified to be appropriate for the data that were available. Working with fisheries scientists to adapt the ideal approach, data from all commercially fished species in a region were used to estimate the MSY for each species and were combined to obtain a reference point of multispecies MSY. | Higher scores reflect fishing practices with sustainably high yields that avoid excessively high exploitation (overfishing), and do not target threatened populations.<br  /><br />For Global 2012 and 2013, the formulae show that a stock receives a score of zero if either it is completely depleted, i.e. B/BMSY = 0, or strongly underfished, i.e. B/ BMSY = 3.35, with 3.35 representing the local currently observed maximum value. Any past or future B/ BMSY values greater than 3.35, as well as the species with this maximum value, would receive a zero score for food provision to denote that the species is severely underfished. However, given that underutilization of resources is generally easier to remediate than depletion, we apply an asymmetrical buffer around values of B/ BMSY close to 1 that get assigned a perfect score, (i.e., overfished stocks achieve a perfect score if B/BMSY is up to 0.2 points below 1 but underfished stocks achieve a perfect score if B/BMSY is within 0.5 points of 1). Thus, overfished species negatively influence the long-term sustainable delivery of the food provision goal more than underfished species do.
**Global 2013** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was calculated based on estimating population biomass relative to the biomass that can deliver maximum sustainable yield for each landed stock (B/BMSY). The estimates of B/BMSY were obtained by applying a model developed by Martell & Frœse, (2013), and referred to as the “catch-MSY” method. This ratio is conventionally used to inform fisheries management. <br  /><br  /> This approach adopts the population biomass at MSY (BMSY) as a single-species reference point, which by various assessment frameworks is considered conservative (e.g., Frœse et al. 2011). Single-species values of B/ BMSY are aggregated using a geometric mean ensuring that some multi-species effects may influence the scores. <br  /><br  /> This is a more direct measure of population health because it relates directly to population size, rather than the harvested biomass of those populations. More importantly, this reference point was calculated through a more robust model than the one used in Global 2012, published by Frœse & Martell in 2013. | Since Global 2012, several new data-poor approaches have been developed to assess fisheries that leverage globally-available information (Costello et al., 2012; Martell & Frœse, 2013; Thorson et al., 2013). The catch-MSY approach improves upon the method used in Global 2012 in that it leverages a mechanistic understanding of the connection between harvest dynamics and population dynamics and uses this to infer stock depletion levels as a function of both historical patterns in catch and of species-specific resilience traits (see also Thorson et al. 2013). In addition, this model is more informative in the case of developing fisheries, whereas the previous approach assumed a perfect score in cases where a peak with successive decline had yet to be observed. <br>The “catch-MSY” model, as designed by Martell & Frœse, calculates catch/MSY. For our analyses, we converted this to an estimate of B/BMSY, i.e. an indicator of stock abundance rather than catch, which is more directly informative of stock heath. This more complex (although still data poor) approach better takes into account species-specific fishery dynamics.  In addition, the scores for each population were combined using a geometric mean, which ensures that smaller, rarer populations have more weight and thus biodiversity of the catch is taken into account as well. As before, regions are penalized for underharvest and (more severely) for overharvest. |
**Brazil (2014)** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was calculated in the same manner as Global 2012, with a modified sustainability term. <br  /><br  /> As in Global 2012, the reference point is based on an estimate of the optimum amount of all marine species that may be caught sustainably: mMSY. | The fisheries sub-goal was calculated in the same manner as Global 2012; this study was conducted before improvements to the approach (Global 2013). However, local-scale data on exploitation category of species caught within Brazil’s EEZ was used as catch-based sustainability index, an improvement over the original Global 2012 approach. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was based on population biomass relative to the biomass that can deliver maximum sustainable yield (B/BMSY) and fishing mortality relative to fishing mortality that can deliver maximum sustainable yield (F/FMSY) for each landed stock, using formal stock assessments rather than relying solely on data-poor estimates from catch data. These ratios are conventionally used to inform fisheries management. <br  /><br  /> This approach adopts the population biomass at MSY, i.e. BMSY, as a single-species reference point, in combination with the fishing mortality at maximum sustainable yield, i.e. FMSY. | Stock assessments were only available for 41 different species across the whole study area. These 41 species accounted for ~59% of the total average catch across the catch time series data. We tested the use of a recently published data-poor approach (Costello et al. 2012) to obtain B/ BMSY values for the remaining stocks. To validate the results we compared estimates for which we had formal stock assessment values and found the latter to be outside the confidence bounds predicted by the model. Other estimates of overfishing are available for data poor stocks (Dick & MacCall 2010), however these only cover ~2% of overall catches. Therefore, our analyses were only based on values from assessed stocks.<br  /><br  />From each assessment we extracted the estimates for B/BMSY and F/FMSY that are assigned to the whole species throughout the west coast of the US. Fisheries scores were then assigned to each region based on the contribution of each species in each region to the overall catch in that region. These weights were assigned based on the average catch of each species across all years of recorded catches (1950-2011). This means that each species gets a single score in the overall study area, and what differentiates the scores from region to region is which species are in that area and how much they contribute to the area’s average historical catch. We used the average catch over time instead of current catch as a weighting factor as it reflects the mean potential contribution of each species to total food provision, smoothing over stochastic fluctuations and possible recent declines. Catch data were only available at the state level, so all regions within California received the same status score. |  For the U.S. West Coast, combining F/FMSY with the population size compared to the size that ensures MSY (B/BMSY) allows us to take into consideration how it is currently being exploited. A population that is dwindling, but is also not under heavy fishing pressure, has more chances of recovering and so it receives a higher score than one that has a similar B/BMSY but is also under strong fishing pressure, thus being most likely to continue in its decline in the near future. On the other hand, a population that is abundant, but has a low F/FMSY, is not being exploited to its full potential and thus its score gets partially penalized due to this underutilization. This approach produces lower scores for species where both underfishing and overfishing are occurring, but does not punish as severely for underfishing of stocks.

*Mariculture*

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a Score |
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------|
**Global 2012** | Mariculture was calculated as the yield reported to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) multiplied by the sustainability for each species harvested.<br  /><br  />The reference point is based on the goal for each region to produce as much farmed seafood as sustainably possible within its coastal area. The reference point for mariculture is a spatial comparison (and not a theoretical functional relationship for sustainable production yield as there is for wild-caught fisheries), set at the amount of seafood produced per square kilometer of eligible coastline in the most productive region, which, at the time of the global study, was China. Setting a spatial reference point in this way assumes that because China is able to produce such a high proportion of mariculture to its coastal area, all regions should be able to as well, given current ecological and technological conditions. This also assumes that it is socially desirable for all regions to produce farmed species at this level, which is likely not true for all regions.<br  /><br  />Global 2012 compared all areas to that with the highest observed production density after the sustainability coefficient was applied, based on the assumption that all coastal area in each region could be developed for mariculture at the same production density as the reference region (i.e., China) and that maximum potential productivity per unit of area is similar across ecosystems and regions. This caused regions with extensive proportions of coastline where mariculture is unsuitable for biological reasons (e.g., the water freezes for large part of the year) or logistical reasons (e.g., scarcely inhabited), such as Canada, to be unduly penalized. | At the global scale it was not possible to account for all physically appropriate habitats where mariculture could occur, and thus the entire area within 3nm from the coastline was considered potential habitat, although it is clear that that entire habitat is not physically suitable for mariculture, nor would it be socially desirable to do so. However, restricting the area based on biophysical constraints and social preferences at a global scale was not possible. Gauging mariculture sustainability was difficult and was ultimately based on information from a Mariculture Sustainability Index (MSI) by Trujillo (2008). The MSI incorporated information on wastewater treatment, origin of feed (i.e., fishmeal or other) and the origin of seed (i.e., hatchery or wild caught). The MSI, however, was not recalculated after 2005 and, when missing, values from other regions or from related species had to be used. | Higher scores reflect high food provisioning in a sustainable manner, while not compromising the water quality in the farmed area and not relying on wild populations to feed or replenish the cultivated species. A score of 100 means that a region is sustainably harvesting the greatest amount of farmed seafood possible based on its own potential (where its maximum potential is estimated in different ways depending on the assessment). A low score can indicate one of two things – that species are being farmed in an unsustainable manner or that regions are not maximizing the potential to farm in their marine territorial waters.
**Global 2013** | A similar model to the one developed previously in Global 2012 was used in Global 2013; however, since we modified the approach to setting the reference point, the calculation of the results has significantly changed.<br  /><br  />Global 2013 instead bases the reference point on harvested tonnes per coastal inhabitant (with coastal defined as within 25 km inland), under the assumption that production depends on the presence of coastal communities that can provide the labor force, infrastructures, and economic demand to support the development and economic viability of mariculture facilities. Thus, two regions with an equal number of coastal inhabitants harvesting an equal tonnage of cultured seafood should score the same, even if one is larger than the other, as the productivity is commensurate to each region’s socio-economic potential to develop mariculture. Stated another way, mariculture development is assumed to scale proportionally with coastal population as a proxy for local demand and potential logistic limitations to farm development, e.g., presence of infrastructures, coastal access, and locally available workforce. Given the very high skew in the status values per region, we set the reference point to the 95th percentile region (Thailand), with all regions above that value set to a status score = 1.0 | Global 2013 differs from Global 2012 due to the reference point; see below. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The status of the Mariculture sub-goal was calculated using harvest data reported by the Brazilian Institute of the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA). For each of up to four species cultured within the state, the score was determined by the yield, the reference sustainable production per unit area, and the total potential farming area. <br  /><br  />At the regional scale in Brazil, restricting the area available for Mariculture based on biophysical constraints and social preferences was possible. | Locally cultured species were used to calculate scores and appropriate reference points were set for each species state. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | The status of the Mariculture sub-goal was calculated as the sustainable production density of shellfish biomass from mariculture relative to a target level of production density for each state within the region.<br  /><br  /> For the mariculture sub-goal, the reference point was modified to incorporate local information on suitable areas for cultivation and desirable production targets, proposed by the US government agency responsible for marine resources management (NOAA). This is a case where conceptually the US West Coast approach is similar to Assessments 1 and 2 but the reference point is based on better information. | Better information about physical and social limitations on mariculture allotments was available for the regional study in the US West Coast. The US government has identified areas that are appropriate for mariculture based on current water quality and coastal development, and thus mariculture production was assessed only within these predefined areas, and not for the entire coastline as was done in Global 2012. In addition, a target level of production increase was proposed by the ocean government agency that was used to set the reference point. |

#### Ready to start on **Artisanal Opportunities**?

*Ideal Approach*

Ideally, this goal would include some measure of how easy or hard it is for people to access ocean resources when they need them and a quantified evaluation of the sustainability of harvest of all nearshore stocks used by artisanal fishermen. The type of reference point used will depend on the data available.

*Practical Guidance*

You should include data that are distinct from the catch data used in other areas of **Food Provision**. So once you find catch data and access data, you should think about which goals to use it in. For instance, if you find tonnage of artisanally-caught fish, you should include that elsewhere. If you find access for **Tourism**, you can use it there too. In any case, you will likely modify the default Global Assessment model using different and better-resolved data.

>For example, in the Baltic Sea region, **Artisanal Opportunities** is very closely connected to **Tourism and Recreation** since there are a lot of locals and tourists using the shared sea for enjoyment. You will have to decide how to apportion the data.

Here, you will want to find proxy data for *access* in whatever way best suits your areas. This could be drawn from physical, economic, regulatory, or stock condition data as an indication of availability. A combination of all of these would be best to more accurately speak to the philosophy, but of course it is limited by data.

For example, in the U.S. West Coast Assessment (2014), three metrics were used to define **Artisanal Opportunity** that you can use to study:

| Type of Access | Data Used | Reference Point |
|-----|------|-------|
| Phyiscal | Number of coastal access points per mile | 1 coastal access point per mile |
| Economic | Change in gas price over time | No change in gas price |
| Resource | Condition of fish stocks through NOAA Fish Stock Index | Perfect sustainability score on FSI |

The **reference point for this goal** would likely be full access to the resource. Keep in mind that the access is for people, and therefore a marine protected area may not count towards full access.

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | Status for this goal is measured as the demand for opportunities to fish artisanally. Demand is estimated using poverty levels as proxy, measured by the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, adjusted by the purchasing power parity. The supply was estimated using an indicator that ranked how well regions regulated and supported artisanal fishing, as part of a study by Mora et al. (2009). This assessment did not incorporate a measure of the health of the targeted species or of sustainability of the fishing practices as a standardized artisanal harvest database was not available at a global scale. <br> The reference point for artisanal fishing opportunities is that all demand for artisanal fishing is allowed and/or achieved and that the fishing is done in a way that doesn't compromise future fishing resources. Thus, the reference point is that ‘supply’ (i.e., fisheries regulations as measured by Mora et al. (2009)) is greater than demand so that unmet demand is 0, i.e., all demand for artisanal fishing is allowed and/or achieved. |  The need for artisanal fishing could potentially be driven by any number of socio-economic factors, but perhaps the most wide-spread reason is the need for food either directly or through undocumented local trade which correlates well with poverty level. Data on how many people live below the poverty level are not available for many regions. Therefore, we used an analogous proxy that is more complete globally: per capita gross domestic product (pcGDP) adjusted by the purchasing power parity (PPP). Because no time series data were available for the access to artisanal fishing measured in the study by Mora et al. (2009), the trend was actually solely driven by the change over time in the PPPpcGDP, i.e., how ‘demand’ is changing over time. The sustainability of artisanal fishing practices could be approximated by using the status of the species that are targeted by artisanal fishermen. Unfortunately data on harvest from artisanal fisheries are often unavailable so we were unable to include this term in the calculation of this goal; we include it here for conceptual completeness. | A score of 100 means that a region is addressing and meeting the needs that people and communities have to fish artisanally by implementing government policies that permit or encourage them to do so, providing appropriate access to near-shore areas, and maintaining the species targeted in good health. A low score indicates that regions are not achieving or allowing sustainable artisanal fishing opportunities to be realized.
**Global 2013** | Same as Global 2012. No data update available. | Same as Global 2012. No data update available. |
**Brazil (2014)** | Economic or physical access or demand to fishing were not deemed to reflect circumstances in Brazil, and therefore this simplified model reflects that the primary driver of artisanal fishing opportunity is the availability of fish to capture (i.e., the condition of the stocks).<br  />This model was based solely on the sustainability index calculated using the exploitation status of species. The reference point for artisanal fishing opportunities is an established target of 1.0, that is, all stocks are categorized as either Developing or Fully Exploited. Due to the widespread nature of artisanal fisheries throughout Brazil, and the major contribution of small-scale activities to total landings for the country, all species were considered possible targets of artisanal fishing activities. | In Global 2012 artisanal fishing opportunity was assessed as a function of the need and the accessibility with a place-holder for stock status (which could not be assessed at global scales for artisanal-scale fishing). For Brazil the primary driver of artisanal fishing opportunity is the availability of fish to capture (i.e. the condition of the stocks).<br  /><br  />Because the scale of analysis for which we had stock status information was national, we chose not to include a measure of artisanal need (levels of poverty), which has great variation within Brazil. In addition, we assume that access to fishing is largely open because permitting and regulations from the Ministry of Fisheries are not considered restrictive, and in most cases, neither is physical access. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | We developed a model using physical and economic access to coastal areas and access to the biological resources through the effectiveness of fisheries management as key variables. This approach does not model demand, but simply assumes that as long as there are no obstacles to pursuing artisanal fishing, the goal is fully achieved. These data better capture the nature of small-scale fisheries in the study area (artisanal, subsistence, and small-scale commercial) whereas the global model focused essentially on subsistence fishing. <br> Members of the public in the region fish artisanally from shore-based coastal access points (like beaches and jetties) as well as from boats. The key variables affecting access to these two modes of artisanal fishing differ and so we treat them separately in our assessment. Shore-based fishing is primarily constrained by physical access to fishing locations and is thus measured as percent of coastline within a mile of coastal access points. The target here is to maximize the amount of public access along the coast, therefore a perfect score results when each part of a region’s coastline has a coastal access point within 1 mile. We calculate these scores using a raster allocation model with 1-mile resolution intersecting at the coastline. | There are no data available on the number of people actively participating in artisanal fishing activities, nor a good approximation of what a reasonable reference condition would be that would allow to model ‘demand’ for artisanal fishing opportunities were these data available. Instead, we only consider physical and economic access to fishing opportunities and to the biological resources by assessing the condition of targeted fish stocks in the region, focusing exclusively on whether artisanal fishing opportunities are being fully provided in the region. This approach differs from the Global 2012 and 2013 assessments, where artisanal fishing opportunities were assessed as a function of need (based on the level of poverty present in a region) and the effectiveness of small-scale fisheries management in satisfying this need, mainly focusing on artisanal opportunities for subsistence purposes. It is also important to note that we were able to incorporate the accessibility to the desired species (i.e. status of the targeted stocks) only in this assessment because of data availability, but ideally we would’ve included this also in Global 2012 and 2013. |

***
