####Practical Considerations

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally,  information would be available to allow you to to assess the amount of carbon stored in every coastal habitat in your area. The best information would show area covered and some measure of the quality of the habitat for this goal. For example, a dense mangrove forest would be better quality than a sparse mangrove forest. Additionally, different weights would be assigned to the habitats based on their relative ability to store carbon, and this factor could be used to penalize areas where there is greater loss of carbon and reward areas where this is a greater storage of carbon. The carbon storage model could then incorporate such weights in a similar way to the **Coastal Protection** goal. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely bes temporal in most cases. This means that historic data are needed so that current habitat values can be compared to a past state.

>TIP: Understanding habitat carbon storage rates is an area of ongoing research. The capacity for habitats to store carbon varies, and depends on the morphology of plants in the system.

### Ready to start the **Carbon Storage** goal?

The model and approach for **Carbon Storage** developed for the Global assessment will likely be appropriate for independent assessments. Knowing the area and the condition of of carbon-storing habitats are the two components that are most important. It is important to spend time looking for a way to quantify condition, but it may not be possible to find.

<!---This section below will need to be reworked because the habitat data aren't great and we don't provide them in a way that would be usable for independent groups. To see what I mean, look at the habitat extent for any country, here Colombia: https://github.com/OHI-Science/col/blob/draft/subcountry2014/layers/hab_extent_gl2014.csv. Note that all habitat coverage is the same across all regions; we didn't even attempt to downweight these. They will need to have better local data.--->
One of the first decisions for your team to make is **whether to use the available data** in the Global Assessments or to use another dataset. This is because your goal model shouldn't change entirely from the Global, and you could even use the global data layers that are spatially-explicit and offered at a resolution of 1 km^2. The global data layers show mangroves, saltmarshes, and sea grasses. Further, they are already available for you to use and will therefore expedite your process for this goal. You should think here, however, of how your regions' size compare to the dataset's scale, and return to this question once you are thinking about the **reference points** farther on. You should also remember that we recommend using habitats that can store carbon on the order of 100 years, thereby limiting the types of habitat types you will need.

> TIP:, if you look at your default data on the WebApp, you will see **Carbon Storage** information presented for **mangroves**, **salt marshes**, and **sea grass** even if there are no mangroves in your area. You will not be scored on these if they are not in your area.

<!---I switched the order of condition and contribution since condition is more important--->
The second group of items to consider are the **condition** and **carbon contribution**. **Condition** is more essential than **contribution** in this case because <!---probably worth explaining here what condition means, and in the next sentence describing how to measure it. Condition is best if it's not a judgment call--they can look for studies of the 'health' of each habitat. Have there been studies about density, or disease, or grazing responses?--->. **Condition** .... **Contribution** is how much each habitat stores relatively to the others--such as the rates of carbon uptake as measured by empirical data. For this you would have to go to the literature and find ratios of organic nutrient uptake between habitats, and you would have to make sure these studies are done correctly to represent your area. For example, were the studies done with a young mangrove forest, or an older one, which might have different growth rates? 

<!---let's look into this more; I feel like this may not have been worded well and it might be misleading--->
> In the Global assessments, the condition of seagrass was calculated as "Current % cover or hectares of habitat divided by reference % cover or hectares." Salt marshes, on the other hand, were assigned a score of 1 if they had an increasing or stable trend, and assigned 0.5 if they had a decreasing trend.

A vital consideration for this goal is **the reference point**. It is an important decision to be made based on good science given the limitations of available data. The reference point is the extent of the habitat at some time in the past, in other words the ideal condition. You will need historical data for this--either from satellites, published papers, or even hand-drawn maps. For questions of sustainability, you must consider, what is a good year to set as your historical past extent? The reference year should be identified based on SMART principles, particularly that it is an ambitious goal, but also realistic. 

> In the U.S. West Coast assessment (2014), researchers went to the local public library to find hand-drawn maps of historical salt marsh extents in California. 

In this case, perhaps your choice of historical reference point may be guided by a policy target as well. For example, are there any climate change policies in your area, with defined targets and objectives? Are there any restoration or carbon storage projects in your area? Do any organizations offer guidance on the amount of carbon storage your management policies should be aiming for?
