## **Coastal Livelihoods and Economies**

> The **Coastal Livelihoods and Economies** goal rewards productive coastal economies that avoid the loss of ocean-dependent livelihoods while maximizing livelihood quality.

This goal is founded on two sub-goals: **Livelihoods** and **Economies** of ocean dependent sectors. **Livelihoods** measures of jobs and wages, and **Economies** measures revenues. The two halves of this goal are tracked separately because the number and quality of jobs and the amount of revenue produced are both of considerable interest to stakeholders and governments, and could show very different patterns, such as is the case when high revenue sectors do not necessarily provide large employment opportunities. The goal aims to maintain the number of coastal and ocean-dependent livelihoods (jobs) in a region, and maintain productive coastal economies (revenues), while also maximizing livelihood quality (represented by relative wages).

> This is an area where economic studies are integrated and inform the concept of ocean health.

#### Keep in Mind

Maintaining jobs in this case means not losing jobs (or that it keeps pace with national employment trends in other sectors) -- this sub-goal does not give credit for *gaining* jobs in the Global Assessments. It does not attempt to capture aspects of job identity like reputation, desirability, or other social or cultural perspectives associated with different jobs, nor does it account for the impact upon an individual but rather focuses on the aggregate. One can examine the component parts that make up this goal, however, to evaluate individual sectors and infer implications for job identity.

### **Livelihoods**

> The **Livelihoods** sub-goal describes livelihood quantity and quality.

#### Philosophy

This sub-goal evaluates the quantitative and qualitative benefits workers get from the oceans in the form of jobs and wages. In the Global Assessments, the two sub-components are equally important because the number of jobs is a proxy for livelihood quantity, and the per capita average annual wages is a proxy for job quality. Some relevant sectors include tourism, commercial fishing, marine mammal watching, and working at ports and harbors, among others. Jobs and wages produced from marine-related industries are clearly of huge value to many people, and directly benefit those who are employed--they also benefit those who do not directly participate in the industries but rather gain indirectly (known in economics as multipliers) from the value of community identity, tax revenues, and other indirect economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy.

#### Ideal Approach

This sub-goal should represent and encompass all marine sectors that supply jobs and wages to coastal communities, incorporating information on the sustainability of different sectors and also working conditions and job satisfaction. Job identity would also be an important part of this. Capturing the indirect as well as direct benefits from jobs, wages, and revenue from coastal communities and beyond is best; where data do not exist, multipliers derived from the literature can be incorporated into jobs to attempt to capture this. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving window temporal approach, or a spatial comparison.

#### Keep in Mind

It's important to note that the data approaches taken to date in the Global Assessments are imperfect, and do not represent the one way to convey the importance of individual identity with coastal work. The values are shown for the aggregate community and are proxies for quality-of-life of the individual. Incorporating information and parameters that reflect well-being from coastal livelihoods would represent a useful improvement over the model used in the Global Assessment.

*****

### **Economies**

> The **Economies** sub-goal captures the economic value associated with marine sectors deriving ocean-dependent revenue.

#### Philosophy

The **Economies** sub-goal evaluates the revenue generated from marine-based industries. Strong coastal economies are something that people value, and this can be reflected by the GDP generated by these coastal regions both directly and indirectly. The economies sub-goal is composed of a single component, revenue.

#### Ideal Approach

Gather economic data for each coast, and traced from all economic sectors both directly and indirectly related to marine industries. When these data are not available it is possible to use revenue data at a larger scale and adapt them to a coastal area based on population distribution. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving-window temporal approach.

#### Keep in Mind

The definition of a marine-related sector can vary. There are jobs that are directly connected to the marine environment, such as shipping, fishing, longshore workers, but also some that are connected indirectly, such as supplies and supporting industries. The use of multipliers in attempts to capture the indirect revenue generated by jobs more indirectly associated to marine sectors is a well-established method in economics, and is encouraged in this approach.

***
